terminal-configurations/terminal-themes/terminal-themes.md, before:

# Terminal Themes

Making the terminal visually pleasant and informative is a big thing for me since I am a very visual person.

I have tried a few themes in the past, having used [Powerlevel10k](https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k) for a while with [Oh My ZSH!](https://ohmyz.sh) but I didn't find it  easy to use or customise and found that getting it to work in the first place was quite a hassle.

Enter April 2025 when I discovered [Starship](https://starship.rs)!

## Starship

While [Starship](https://starship.rs) is not strictly limited to *Oh My ZSH!* (you don't even need to use ZSH as a shell) it is actually a pleasure to setup and customize due to its polished developer experience. Much easier than Powerlevel10k.

### Installing Starship

I chose to Install most of my development packages using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on my mac. In their own words, Homebrew is *"The Missing Package Manager for macOS (or Linux)"* and I find myself gravitating towards it whenever there is some package that I need to install in my system.

You can find different installation instructions on [Starship's website](https://starship.rs) if you have different needs but this is the quick and easy way on a Mac:

1. Install Starship using homebrew:
    ```bash
    brew install starship
    ```

2. For ZSH, Add the following lines to the end of your `.zshrc` file. You should find your `.zshrc` file at the root of your current user folder (`~/.zshrc`).
    ```bash
    # Activate Starship
    eval "$(starship init zsh)"
    ```
3. Restart your terminal session or `source` your `.zshrc` file to activate the changes.
    ```bash
    source ~/.zshrc
    ```
Voilà, Starship should be up and running.

### Add a Starship Preset

Next up you may want to start with a [Starship preset](https://starship.rs/presets/). I chose [Gruvbox Rainbow Preset](https://starship.rs/presets/gruvbox-rainbow#gruvbox-rainbow-preset) as a starting point.

In your terminal run the following command:
```bash
starship preset gruvbox-rainbow -o ~/.config/starship.toml
```

### Customize your Starship Preset
 Before I started doing this, I added a VS Code extension to [help edit](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items/?itemName=tamasfe.even-better-toml) .toml files. You may skip this step as it's not necessary.

 After that, I opened my Starship config file and started making changes following the excellent [docs](https://starship.rs/config/). By default it will be installed in your user folder at `~/.config/starship.toml`.

 There were a few things I wanted to do:
 - I wanted to display the current Python Virtual Environment (venv) if one was active.
 - I wanted the time to be displayed in hours minutes and seconds.
 - I wanted an icon to reflect which Shell environment I was currently in if switching from ZSH to Bash or Fish.

 I achieved all of these following the steps below.

#### Customizing the `[python]` settings to display the current active python Virtual Environment (venv)
This was achieved by adding `( $virtualenv )` next to the `$version` variable in the `format` property.
```toml
[python]
symbol = ""
style = "bg:color_blue"
format = '[[ $symbol( $version ( $virtualenv )) ](fg:color_fg0 bg:color_blue)]($style)'
```

#### Change the `[time]` settings so my terminal clock looks like `17:39:13`
This is achieved by using the `"%T` pattern for the `time_format` property:
```toml
[time]
disabled = false
time_format = "%T"
style = "bg:color_bg1"
format = '[[  $time ](fg:color_fg0 bg:color_bg1)]($style)'
```

#### Add the `shell` module to show an indicator for the currently used shell 
This was achieved in two steps. I first created a `[shell]` module in the configuration file with icons for `Fish`, `ZSH`, `Bash` and `Powershell`.

```toml
[shell]
fish_indicator = '󰈺 '
zsh_indicator = ' '
bash_indicator = ' '
powershell_indicator = ' '
unknown_indicator = 'mystery shell'
format = '[[ $indicator ](fg:#83a598 bg:color_bg3)]($style)'
style = "bg:color_bg3"
disabled = false
```

I then inserted the `$shell` module into the main `format` property of the configuration file. I chose to put it together with the preset's `$docker_context` and `$conda` modules and had the foreground and background style colours above to match these:

```toml
format = """
[](color_orange)\
$os\
$username\
[](bg:color_yellow fg:color_orange)\
$directory\
[](fg:color_yellow bg:color_aqua)\
$git_branch\
$git_status\
[](fg:color_aqua bg:color_blue)\
$c\
$rust\
$golang\
$nodejs\
$php\
$java\
$kotlin\
$haskell\
$python\
[](fg:color_blue bg:color_bg3)\
$shell\
$docker_context\
$conda\
[](fg:color_bg3 bg:color_bg1)\
$time\
[ ](fg:color_bg1)\
$line_break$character"""
```
#### Don't forget to restart your terminal or `source` your `.zshrc` file!
To activate the changes you've just made, `source` your `.zshrc` or restart your terminal session:
```bash
source ~/.zshrc
```

## How I got here?
I discovered Starship after I found out that the [Powerlevel10k](https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k) project wasn't in active development anymore. I had a few bugs that I wanted to iron out and instead of trying to fic them I just googled `Powerlevel10k alternative` and stumbled upon Starship.

Commit message:

📝 docs: update terminal themes documentation with nerd font installation
- add step to install a Nerd Font before installing Starship
- update step numbers to reflect the new step

terminal-configurations/terminal-themes/terminal-themes.md, after:

# Terminal Themes

Making the terminal visually pleasant and informative is a big thing for me since I am a very visual person.

I have tried a few themes in the past, having used [Powerlevel10k](https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k) for a while with [Oh My ZSH!](https://ohmyz.sh) but I didn't find it  easy to use or customise and found that getting it to work in the first place was quite a hassle.

Enter April 2025 when I discovered [Starship](https://starship.rs)!

## Starship

While [Starship](https://starship.rs) is not strictly limited to *Oh My ZSH!* (you don't even need to use ZSH as a shell) it is actually a pleasure to setup and customize due to its polished developer experience. Much easier than Powerlevel10k.

### Installing Starship

I chose to Install most of my development packages using [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) on my mac. In their own words, Homebrew is *"The Missing Package Manager for macOS (or Linux)"* and I find myself gravitating towards it whenever there is some package that I need to install in my system.

You can find different installation instructions on [Starship's website](https://starship.rs) if you have different needs but this is the quick and easy way on a Mac:

1. Install a [Nerd Font](https://www.nerdfonts.com) in your computer.
    I chose the [GeistMono Nerd Font](https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts/releases/download/v3.3.0/GeistMono.zip).

2. Install Starship using homebrew:
    ```bash
    brew install starship
    ```

3. For ZSH, Add the following lines to the end of your `.zshrc` file. You should find your `.zshrc` file at the root of your current user folder (`~/.zshrc`).
    ```bash
    # Activate Starship
    eval "$(starship init zsh)"
    ```
    
4. Restart your terminal session or `source` your `.zshrc` file to activate the changes.
    ```bash
    source ~/.zshrc
    ```
Voilà, Starship should be up and running.

### Add a Starship Preset

Next up you may want to start with a [Starship preset](https://starship.rs/presets/). I chose [Gruvbox Rainbow Preset](https://starship.rs/presets/gruvbox-rainbow#gruvbox-rainbow-preset) as a starting point.

In your terminal run the following command:
```bash
starship preset gruvbox-rainbow -o ~/.config/starship.toml
```

### Customize your Starship Preset
 Before I started doing this, I added a VS Code extension to [help edit](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items/?itemName=tamasfe.even-better-toml) .toml files. You may skip this step as it's not necessary.

 After that, I opened my Starship config file and started making changes following the excellent [docs](https://starship.rs/config/). By default it will be installed in your user folder at `~/.config/starship.toml`.

 There were a few things I wanted to do:
 - I wanted to display the current Python Virtual Environment (venv) if one was active.
 - I wanted the time to be displayed in hours minutes and seconds.
 - I wanted an icon to reflect which Shell environment I was currently in if switching from ZSH to Bash or Fish.

 I achieved all of these following the steps below.

#### Customizing the `[python]` settings to display the current active python Virtual Environment (venv)
This was achieved by adding `( $virtualenv )` next to the `$version` variable in the `format` property.
```toml
[python]
symbol = ""
style = "bg:color_blue"
format = '[[ $symbol( $version ( $virtualenv )) ](fg:color_fg0 bg:color_blue)]($style)'
```

#### Change the `[time]` settings so my terminal clock looks like `17:39:13`
This is achieved by using the `"%T` pattern for the `time_format` property:
```toml
[time]
disabled = false
time_format = "%T"
style = "bg:color_bg1"
format = '[[  $time ](fg:color_fg0 bg:color_bg1)]($style)'
```

#### Add the `shell` module to show an indicator for the currently used shell 
This was achieved in two steps. I first created a `[shell]` module in the configuration file with icons for `Fish`, `ZSH`, `Bash` and `Powershell`.

```toml
[shell]
fish_indicator = '󰈺 '
zsh_indicator = ' '
bash_indicator = ' '
powershell_indicator = ' '
unknown_indicator = 'mystery shell'
format = '[[ $indicator ](fg:#83a598 bg:color_bg3)]($style)'
style = "bg:color_bg3"
disabled = false
```

I then inserted the `$shell` module into the main `format` property of the configuration file. I chose to put it together with the preset's `$docker_context` and `$conda` modules and had the foreground and background style colours above to match these:

```toml
format = """
[](color_orange)\
$os\
$username\
[](bg:color_yellow fg:color_orange)\
$directory\
[](fg:color_yellow bg:color_aqua)\
$git_branch\
$git_status\
[](fg:color_aqua bg:color_blue)\
$c\
$rust\
$golang\
$nodejs\
$php\
$java\
$kotlin\
$haskell\
$python\
[](fg:color_blue bg:color_bg3)\
$shell\
$docker_context\
$conda\
[](fg:color_bg3 bg:color_bg1)\
$time\
[ ](fg:color_bg1)\
$line_break$character"""
```
#### Don't forget to restart your terminal or `source` your `.zshrc` file!
To activate the changes you've just made, `source` your `.zshrc` or restart your terminal session:
```bash
source ~/.zshrc
```

## How I got here?
I discovered Starship after I found out that the [Powerlevel10k](https://github.com/romkatv/powerlevel10k) project wasn't in active development anymore. I had a few bugs that I wanted to iron out and instead of trying to fic them I just googled `Powerlevel10k alternative` and stumbled upon Starship.
